DOCSP-45201 Cluster monitoring (#133)
mongodb/docs-ruby: source/monitoring/cluster-monitoring.txt

.. _ruby-cluster-monitoring:

==================
Cluster Monitoring
==================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: code example, server, topology

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecols

Overview
--------

This guide shows you how to use the {+driver-short+} to monitor server discovery 
and monitoring (SDAM) events events in a MongoDB instance, replica set, or sharded 
cluster by using custom subscribers or available subscriber methods. These events 
occur when there are any changes in the state of the MongoDB instance or cluster 
that you are connected to.

You can use information about SDAM events in your application to understand 
cluster changes, assess cluster health, or perform capacity planning.

SDAM Subscribers
----------------

You can use the {+driver-short+}'s ``subscribe`` method to subscribe to events. 
The ``subscribe`` method requires you to specify a monitoring ``topic`` 
(the monitored event type) and a subscriber object.

The following code uses the ``ServerOpeningLogSubscriber`` to monitor a connection

> to a server instance. You can subscribe to events at a global or client level:

Author: Kept the sentences separate since I added a little more explanation on what 'global' means. Let me know what you think!

.. literalinclude:: /includes/monitoring/monitoring.rb
   :start-after: start-available-subscriber
   :end-before: end-available-subscriber
   :language: ruby
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

The following table provides available subscribers and their monitoring ``topic``: 

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 35 20 45

   * - Method Name
     - Monitoring Topic
     - Description 

   * - `SDAMLogSubscriber <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Monitoring/SDAMLogSubscriber.html>`__

>      - 

Author: Yes, need to ask the technical reviewer about this! Will leave a comment for them

>      - 

Author: For technical reviewer: Is there a monitoring topic for the ``SDAMLogSubscriber``?

>      - 

Reviewer: The `SDAMLogSubscriber` is a generic superclass for multiple other subscriber classes (e.g. just about all of the other ones in this list). The driver itself never instantiates an `SDAMLogSubscriber` anywhere. It's probably safe to omit that subscriber from the docs here, and simply let it be documented in the API docs.

     - ``TOPOLOGY_CHANGED``
     - Subscribes to ``TopologyChanged`` events and logs them.

   * - `TopologyClosedLogSubscriber <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Monitoring/TopologyClosedLogSubscriber.html>`__
     - ``TOPOLOGY_CLOSED``
     - Subscribes to ``TopologyClosed`` events and logs them.

   * - `TopologyOpeningLogSubscriber <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Monitoring/TopologyOpeningLogSubscriber.html>`__
     - ``TOPOLOGY_OPENING``
     - Subscribes to ``TopologyOpening`` events and logs them.

You can find a table of SDAM event descriptions in the :ref:`Event Descriptions <SDAM-event-descriptions>` 
section on this page. 

Custom SDAM Monitoring
----------------------

You can create a custom SDAM subscriber to access details about server
and topology events. Create a separate class for each event type, as available
data for each event varies. 

For all events, the ``succeeded`` method is called on each event subscriber with 
the event as the sole argument. A simple SDAM logging subscriber can look 
like the following:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/monitoring/monitoring.rb
   :start-after: start-sdam
   :end-before: end-sdam
   :language: ruby
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

> To subscribe to events, you need to create the appropriate subscriber and 
> subscribe to the correct monitoring ``topic``. The following code shows how 

Reviewer 2: S: I'd [remove "need to"](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/concise-terms/) and the monospace from "topic":
```suggestion
To subscribe to events, create the appropriate subscriber and 
subscribe to its corresponding monitoring topic. The following code shows how 
```

to subscribe to SDAM events globally:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/monitoring/monitoring.rb
   :start-after: start-sdam-subscriber-global
   :end-before: end-sdam-subscriber-global
   :language: ruby
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

The following code shows how to subscribe to SDAM events for a single client 

> by using the ``sdam-proc`` client option:

Reviewer 2: Q: does the first code example that subscribes on the client level also need the sdam-proc option?

Author: No, the ``Proc`` object is used to pass multiple subscribe commands at once to the client! The first example only subscribes to one event, so it is not necessary.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/monitoring/monitoring.rb
   :start-after: start-sdam-subscriber-client
   :end-before: end-sdam-subscriber-client
   :language: ruby
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

When you run the application, your subscriber records the SDAM event and 
outputs messages such as the following:

> .. code-block:: none
> 

Reviewer 2: S: since this is code output, I'd remove the copy button
```suggestion
.. code-block:: none
   :copyable: false
```

  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:03.495139 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server localhost:27102 initializing.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:03.496504 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server description for localhost:27102 changed from 'unknown' to 'secondary'.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:03.496777 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Topology type 'Unknown' changed to type 'ReplicaSetNoPrimary'.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:03.497306 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server 127.0.0.1:27100 connection closed.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:03.497606 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Topology type 'ReplicaSetNoPrimary' changed to type 'ReplicaSetWithPrimary'.

  # client.close

  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:05.342057 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server localhost:27100 connection closed.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:05.342299 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server localhost:27101 connection closed.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:05.342565 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server localhost:27102 connection closed.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:05.342693 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Topology type 'ReplicaSetWithPrimary' closed.

.. note::

  The ``:sdam_proc`` client option applies only to the given client. 

>   When certain client options are changed via the

Reviewer 2: S: to avoid [via](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/alphabetical-terms/#v):
```suggestion
  When certain client options are changed by using the
```

  ``Client#with`` call, a new cluster may be created by the driver with
  a default set of event subscribers. If this happens, the provided
  ``:sdam_proc`` is not called, and the application may miss events.

Server Heartbeats
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can also create a custom subscriber to monitor server heartbeats.

Custom server heartbeat subscribers differ from other SDAM subscribers,
as they must implement the following three methods: 

- ``started``: Invoked when the listener receives the heartbeat
- ``succeeded``: Response for a successful heartbeat outcome
- ``failed``: Response for a failed heartbeat outcome

> The following code is an example heartbeat event subscriber:

Reviewer 2: S:
```suggestion
The following example shows a heartbeat event subscriber:
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/monitoring/monitoring.rb
   :start-after: start-heartbeat
   :end-before: end-heartbeat
   :language: ruby
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

> You can subscribe to heartbeat events globally or for a specific client:

Reviewer 2: S: briefly introduce the code:
```suggestion
You can subscribe to heartbeat events globally or for a specific client, as shown in the following example:
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/monitoring/monitoring.rb
   :start-after: start-heartbeat-subscribe
   :end-before: end-heartbeat-subscribe
   :language: ruby
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

When you run the application, your subscriber records the heartbeat event and 
outputs messages such as the following:

.. code-block:: none

> 

Reviewer 2: S:
```suggestion
   :copyable: false
```

   D, [2018-09-23T13:44:10.707018 #1739] DEBUG -- : HEARTBEAT | 127.0.0.1:27027 | STARTED
   D, [2018-09-23T13:44:10.707778 #1739] DEBUG -- : HEARTBEAT | 127.0.0.1:27027 | SUCCEEDED | 0.000772381s

.. _SDAM-event-descriptions:

Event Descriptions
------------------

The following table provides the name and description of each SDAM event:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Event Type
     - Description 

   * - `ServerClosed <{+api-root+}/Mongo/Monitoring/Event/ServerClosed.html>`__

>      - Event fired when the server instance is closed.

Reviewer 2: S: to [avoid jargon](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/terms-for-global-audience/#use-jargon-with-care) that might be confusing, you could say "generated" instead of "fired"? or "created"?
```suggestion
     - Event created when the server instance is closed.
```

  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:03.496777 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Topology type 'Unknown' changed to type 'ReplicaSetNoPrimary'.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:03.497306 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server 127.0.0.1:27100 connection closed.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:03.497606 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Topology type 'ReplicaSetNoPrimary' changed to type 'ReplicaSetWithPrimary'.

  # client.close

  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:05.342057 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server localhost:27100 connection closed.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:05.342299 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server localhost:27101 connection closed.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:05.342565 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Server localhost:27102 connection closed.
  D, [2018-10-09T13:58:05.342693 #22079] DEBUG -- : SDAM | Topology type 'ReplicaSetWithPrimary' closed.

.. note::

  The ``:sdam_proc`` client option applies only to the given client. 
  When certain client options are changed by using the
  ``Client#with`` call, a new cluster may be created by the driver with
  a default set of event subscribers. If this happens, the provided
  ``:sdam_proc`` is not called, and the application may miss events.

Server Heartbeats
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can also create a custom subscriber to monitor server heartbeats.

Reviewer 2: S: briefly describe a server heartbeat
```suggestion
You can also create a custom subscriber to monitor server heartbeats, which occur when the server monitor sends a ``hello`` command to the server.
```
